We said and repeated that this conference was a step in the campaign.
A lot of work has already been accomplished.
A document was already published for discussion, and I hope that it will not be discussed by professionals only,
but also by citizens in general since they are directly concerned with this issue.
A lot of people intervened in the organization of today's conference,
either on behalf of their union, or on behalf of their own personal expertise, be it academic or else.
Of course, today's participants are not necessarily members of La France Insoumise's campaign,
nor do they necessarily advocate its programme.
I therefore thank them for taking part in this conference
and I have an opinion on the reasons why they did it, because this was not usual in the past.
The reason is that a lot of the great public services
that are part of the dignity and purpose of the republican state - because ultimately, that's what the state is all about -
i.e. a collective organization at the service of some principles,
and in order to be implemented, these principles need public services that will serve them.
Today, these services, authorities or institutions are all in danger.
Not only for their own sake, since the state is collapsing,
but also for the sake of the aims they are supposed to serve but do not serve anymore
because of a lack of means, and that is not the only aspect of the problem.
The lack of means is not the only aspect that shows that the republican state's authority is collapsing,
there is also the doctrine of the use of forces and institutions
that contribute to the existence of the nation.
This ideological issue has become so essential
that all these civil servants feel the need to get on the stage and alert the public opinion.
What in the past pertained to union action only
- although there's always been a link between union action and the public interest -
has now become a much more widespread issue.
People therefore feel the need to alert the public opinion.
And there is no better moment to do this than an electoral campaign,
the presidential election in particaular.
In what I call the "presidential monarchy" of the Fifth Republic, the presidential election
is the focus of all attention and all the powers.
I therefore encourage all those who deal with important issues for the whole of society
to get involved and to get on the stage,
to have a say, to alert, to explain and to make propositions to the public opinion.
We should raise the level of awareness of our citizens who are now incited
to react rather than think.
Citizens are incited to act according to their compulsions and emotions
rather than according to their own reason and judgement.
We are offering a policy of reason and judgement.
It is to me as spectacular as compulsion and emotion,
and above all more efficient than the braggings that I have witnessed for so many years.
My age and experience is my strength.
I spent a lot of years in Parliament.
I therefore witnessed all sorts of braggings.
I cannot count the laws and measures on terrorism that were adopted.
By the way, the definition of terrorism has changed a lot in the course of the last twenty years.
When I was first elected as senator in 1986, the terrorists were the Kanak separatists.
I am therefore well aware of how easy it is to pretend to be doing a lot of things
and how easily feebleminded people can be impressed.
I know reason has a cost, it requires patience and time, but it is more efficient
and it enables us to make fewer mistakes, and to be less confused and engaged in useless struggles.
You have to get on the stage, whoever you are, whatever your opinions.
I or my friends might not share your opionion,
but speak your mind, say what you think would be good for our country.
I just mentioned the importance of being experienced on this matter,
but being experienced on this matter during an electoral campaign is also important
The great meeting of the 18th March 2012
represented the height of my campaign. It shed light on social issues, the core of all other issues,
but was supplanted the day after by a far-reaching event that gave rise to all sorts of pointless statements.
This event completely disrupted the election. We tend to forget about this.
Some said that my insufficient result in 2012, that was quite remarkable by the way, was due to my character
to the posters we designed or things of the sort.
In truth, the rise of the far right at this point of the campaign
was due to this event
and because the authorities reacted in a way that justified the far right's reasoning.
After all, we live in a democracy.
What was this event? It was the murders committed by Mohamed Merah.
These murders completely disrupted the 2012 presidential election.
It turned the issues of violence and mass murders, of racist murders,
into THE issue that superseded all other issues and prevented citizens from thinking the issue of security.
This morning, you saw people giving their opinion in front of an assembly that aims at thinking.
This doesn't mean that they are involved in my campaign or that they agree with me.
But I must say that some do agree with me.
This comes from the fact that my friends and I worked on and became aware of issues of security.
My friend François Delapierre worked with police and security services and published this book,
which was followed by other works and meetings, and this book's doctrine was gradually improved.
This book is the basis of my doctrine on security issues.
There is also this issue of the National Defence Review entitled "Towards a New Independency"
that encapsulates our work during the conferences on defence Djordje Kuzmanovic, who spoke earlier, and I organized.
Since then a special group is working on these issues, you saw them today:
Lise Maillard and Ugo Bernalicis who spoke and introduced the participants earlier.
In the course of January or February, I will introduce a broader working group
that will be in charge of concluding the report we began working on.
They will organize legislative working groups as well.
What my opponents should be afraid of is that I intend to do what I say I'll do.
And I intend to do this quickly.
Not only because I believe in what I say, I heard this was unusual nowadays,
but this is not new for those who are used to think issues through.
The story goes that Mirabeau said of Robespierre:
"This guy is frightening. He believes in what he says".
Well I believe in what I say.
We'll be ready to get to work as soon as we have to.
The doctrine will be ready, the men and women who'll have to apply it will be ready,
and the method for governing will be ready.
This is not the issue here,
but the state is going through a crisis so intense that we have to think about rebuilding it, of course,
but we also have to think about rebuilding our conception of the police from start to finish.
From start to finish.
Because we satisfied ourselves with applying sticking plasters and repair patches on wooden legs
we are now in a situation where, as policemen describe it, policies create reality.
In other words, we are ticking all the boxes
that are supposed to be the true situation of security and criminality in this country.
Maybe quantum physicists will be delighted, but as far as the management of public affairs is concerned,
it is extremely dangerous to think that reality is what we think it is.
We will have to explain and get across to police services the reasons why we want to reshape them from start to finish,
and this will not only be concerned with the  organization of the state, but also with the structure of the government.
Maybe that the system of the almighty state secretaries,
all the more mighty that they are powerless,
meaning that they run so considerable administrations,
administrations that never stop fighting with one another,
that state secretaries are but temporary problems
during the top officials' carrer paths and the struggles between services.
These state secretaries did not guarantee the authority of the state.
On the contrary, they weakened it.
And today we figure out that we should intervene more subtly, meaning more politically,
at each level of the state.
We no doubt need High Commissioners more than we need secretaries today.
High Commissioners are men and women who are appointed for a specific mission during a specific period.
They would get to work as soon as we would be in office.
If my friends and I held conferences on the issue of defence,
if policemen were involved in the preparation of our report,
as well as magistrates - although the issue of justice is another subject to be dealt with separately -
it is because some people among policemen, soldiers and magistrates
chose to join us in our struggle.
Often, they don't have the possibility to do this openly because of their duties.
I'm not asking them to do so.
We must respect the obligations of service that are connected to the duties of so demanding domains.
But when the time comes, some of them will get involved openly.
so that everyone of you may understand that something new is happening in the traditional political field.
This is what François Pirelli said earlier - that's his alias right? I don't want to reveal any secret.
This means that until now, it is true that our school of thought has often been attached, and rightly,
to the issue of justice and to the way it was meted out,
without forgetting that justice is administered in the name of the French people to apply the laws it voted.
A judge has a personal opinion on how to enforce the law, but the law rules.
This was comfortable, since we could see how to get involved in these issues directly.
Besides justice, whose number one function is to guarantee individual freedoms,
within the balance of the republican society,
used to be the sole object of our attention.
I'm not saying that judges liked us so much - although some did
and there is a debate among magistrates -
but being interested in police and military issues was much more unusual.
But the police and the army are made of citizens
who think about all the problems of our society.
They may even be more competent to understand the consequences of these problems on society's stability,
because petty criminality, that focuses a lot of attention,
is a symptom of the consequences of a set of facts on society.
Of course, individuals are always liable for their actions,
and as far as I'm concerned, I not only believe this,
but individual responsibility is to me a philosophical principle of the Republic.
It is a new phenomenon that generals, admirals, colonels,
either because they are no longer in service and feel therefore freer to act, or still in service,
want to meet us and think we are a fulcrum.
Likewise in the police, at every level. And I want to state this solemnly, I am your fulcrum.
It is true that debates and ideological choices exist in each of these bodies,
and this is normal in a democratic society.
Policemen and soldiers are not robots,
and neither are judges, although some politicians wanted them to enforce the law automatically.
Society is made of human beings, which means that policemen, soldiers and magistrates don't share the same opinions.
You have personal and political opinions
that lead you to express yourself because the state is undergoing a crisis.
Many of you understood that the Siamese twins, meaning the Socialist Party and the Republicans,
who led the state to decompose,
who used your authority without any purpose but their career,
so much so that most of you no longer trust them...
I am opposed to the idea that there is only one solution to this problem.
Many of you know that as the rest of society, the police and the army can choose the far right.
But I want you to know that it is also possible to choose the far Republic that I embody.
Consequently, you can choose La France Insoumise and I as a fulcrum
to resist against illegitimate orders and against a conception of the doctrine of the use of military forces
that does not correspond to the republican ideal.
You can use us as a fulcrum.
This is a new aspect.
I am well aware that it will be a problem for a part of my political family.
I was criticized for giving my opinion on this incredible situation
in which policemen demonstrated at night
and went so far as to demonstrate in front of the Elysée Palace.
This behavior does not correspond to what the police is supposed to do.
For multiple reasons, some limits cannot be crossed in this country,
like the threshold of a nuclear power plant or that of the seat of power of the Republic.
Police or military forces cannot walk around such facilities if they are not ordered to do so.
I perfectly understood that demonstrators were not planning a coup d'état,
but such is the situation today, and this is a serious problem.
It is irresponsible to class policemen in distress, who are humiliated and who fear the future, as members of the far right.
Most of them don't have anything to do with the far right, nor do their demonstrations.
This is why I met my responsibilities in saying that this situation was very serious.
I don't want to lessen the importance of the situation,
and I think that policemen deserved better than an appointment  with the President, a meeting that was immediately accepted,
whereas people demonstrated against the labor law for months and were unable to achieve any goal.
The role of the President of the Republic is not to have an appointment with demonstrators.
That's my opinion. Sometimes maybe, in specific circumstances...
But policemen deserved better. They deserved to be understood.
The republican identity of the state is at stake here,
because the workforce that is supposed to guarantee its security thinks it can defy its authority.
The state is in danger, because it is collapsing.
And this frightens the civil servants who are on the front line to defend it. This is the situation we must face.
I think that the work we began gives clear-cut answers to their preoccupations, too much sometimes,
but I cannot prevent those who want to work from working.
As you know, the more precise we are, the more we can be criticized.
Those who woud set to read my propositions might discover in p. 54
that such and such aspect does not correspond to what they think would be a good solution,
which could make them get on their high horse, thereby creating endless controversies.
I hope this won't be the case.
Now I'm leaving aside police issues because I want to say something about counter-terrorism
since the anniversary of the mass slaughters of the 13th of November is getting closer.
I want my opinion on the subject to be understood as clearly as possible.
But previous to that, I would like to show
that although it was intellectually comfortable to make a connection between
petty criminality in those suburban areas that are continually accused,
and terrorism, even if the proof of the connection between the two was never established,
except for rare cases here and there of disturbed, alcoholic people,
many of which were also drug addicts,
who began practicing religion just before committing murders.
Besides the form of religion they practiced was improbable and did not correspond to anything in the Koran,
as was the case in Nice. The proof of this connection was never established.
However, we are able to show and to prove that there is a real connection
between serious criminality, money laundering financial circuits and  the misdeeds of the enemies of our country.
Interestingly enough, no one ever hears that any financial circuit is discovered and destroyed,
circuits that enable some people to buy weapons - because weapons are no free -
to rent cars, appartments and so on.
These financial circuits have to do with criminality.
And as was shown earlier, these criminal networks are often the same as official networks.
The same people handle the money of crime, prostitution, drugs, murders and terrorism.
Our interest is therefore to fight these networks.
And since we are dealing with terrorism this morning, no one will make us forget that
if terrorist do exist, they are always connected with specific conflicts.
There is always a link with specific conflicts.
All the the terrorist attacks that was perpetrated against our country
were all connected with specific conflicts
These terrorists have always claimed to be part of these conflicts.
Therefore, this connection should be our priority, everyone probably agrees with me.
But the most obvious and visible manifestation of this connection is money!
ISIS was able to pay its soldiers and murderers only because it had money,
and it collected that money in Iraq and Syria
by taxing people there,
and through the exploitation of local resources
with the help of some organizations, like Lafarge, the corporation, as was revealed by Le Monde,
but I'm more specifically talking about certain states.
Ladies and gentlemen, someone transported the oil that was produced in Iraq and Syria
it did not move by itself.
Trucks were used,
and people had to load, drive and unload these trucks,
and then load some boats and drive them from one harbor to another.
These networks are not digital, mysterious or whirling around in the air
to the extent that they cannot be stopped and arrested.
Harbors, boats and trucks are a physical reality, aren't they?
Well these networks involve states, companies and financial circuits,
and we know who they are!
Turkey, the turkish government, the president of Turkey, and more precisely his son-in-law,
who was accused of organizing these traffics by the turkish social democrat party.
And until the Russian intervention that consisted in bombing the pipelines from oil wells to the border with Turkey,
no one did anything but brag and accuse bike thieves of being terrorists
that have the ability of transporting oil around the world.
I said this with a dose of irony, but this is an outrageous situation.
Tracing the financial circuits that finance terrorist attacks is necessary,
and fighting them requires judicial and police services - in order to stop the trafics that enable terrorist attacks -
and geopolitics.
We cannot be the allies - within a military alliance -
of people who organize and finance murders in our country.
We cannot be allied to Turkey when it shoots in the back of the Kurds,
who are our main allies on the field in the fight against
the fascist ideology embodied by organizations such as ISIS, Al Nusra and other fanatical organizations.
We must therefore clean out the geopolitical roots of terrorism. This is efficient.
Chasing everything that moves with an absurd logic is inefficient, a logic that magistrates described very well,
that consists in punishing behaviors rather than acts.
For instance, after the horrible events in Nice, who were said to be committed by ISIS,
authorities emphasized the issue of the burkini
and mixed issues that pertain to law and the enforcement of law,
with issues of ideological committment. Yes, some people can be opposed to the burkini,
but this pertains to ideological reasons, not to legal issues.
This was proven when legal decisions repealed illegal political decisions on this issue.
An absurd situation was created, in which authorities showed they were powerless.
Nothing is worse than showing that authorities are powerless.
This leads me to my second point.
If we consider "terrorism" as the enemy - and I don't think it is,
I think our enemies are terrorists, meaning those who commit terrorist attacks -
well if it is our enemy indeed,
if we repeat over and over that we are "at war",
then we should consequently apply a logic of war.
Of course we should not!
But we are doing it, in an undisciplined and unefficient way.
It is time that the soldiers of the "Sentinelle" operation go back to their barracks.
We are exhausting them for nothing.
We are using the demonstration of force in an absurd way.
Who believes that these soldiers could use their war equipment in the middle of a crowd
in train stations or in front of schools?
This is not a way of solving problems, we all know this.
The army is therefore reduced to do patrols
and these soldiers suffer from this situation that can be read in the eyes of the people they bump into.
Secondly, if we fight an enemy,
the basic rule consists in not admitting he won, especially when he does not ask that.
And yet, we did that on many occasions,
during the horrible attack in Nice in particular.
Finally, we cannot afford to enable him to reach his objectives,
for a terrorist attack does have an objective.
This objective is not just to achieve a mass murder
for which is hired such and such dangerous, psychopath, criminal, lunatic.
This objective is a political outcome, and it is this political outcome that we have to fight.
I repeat, an attack has a political objective, and we have to prevent this objective from succeeding,
when it was not possible to prevent the terrorist attack.
By the way, I often hear that some terrorist attacks were prevented.
I do have the certainty that security services are doing all they can,
and I want to show my solidarity.
I don't belong to the category of the know-it-alls
who know what should have been done better than those who acted after an event occurred.
However, let me ask this question,
if terrorist attacks were prevented, it means we know who wanted to commit them.
Where are they?
Planning a terrorist attack is not a behavior, it is an act.
Where are they? Was someone convicted?
Was someone accused of planning an attack held on remand? Nobody was!
Terrorist attacks were apparently prevented, but we do not know who planned these attacks, and no one was sentenced. Why?
Were they taken into custody in secret prisons, as North-Americans like to do it?
The main aspect of secret prisons is that they are absolutely inefficient.
Did the Guantanamo totrure camp ever prevent the spreading of terrorism anywhere in the world? It did not.
Did the CIA's secret prisons in Europe ever prevent any of the attacks in Europe? They did not.
Therefore, if those who were planning to commit criminal acts,
were arrested but were not brought to justice, this is a problem, and we would like to know where they are now.
Or maybe the President decided to have them assassinated abroad,
since a recently published book informed us that
the President of the Republic gave the order to assassinate at least four people.
He said at least four, maybe there were more, he does not even remember.
He said at least four people, maybe there were six.
As far as murders are concerned, counting them is apparently not an issue.
But this leaves us with a question.
Who was killed? For what reason?
What attacks were planned against France? We would like to know.
Maybe deciding of committing a murder is an attitude that is morally acceptable,
this is a specific philosophical issue, but is it efficient?
Why were those who we supposedly killed not arrested?
If we had the possibility to get close enough to kill them methodically, we undoubtedly could have arrested them.
And if we had arrested them, we could have brought them to justice in order to question them
about the plans against us.
You see, many of the pointless statements that we witnessed
are above all a sign of the powerlessness of authorities to deal with this situation.
I said that...
we needed to cut every link that make terrorist attacks possible one by one.
I think I already said that it was not the case today.
When and where were financial circuits identified and destroyed?
Why were potential criminals assassinated and not arrested?
How come that we stagnate in such inefficiency after so many bombastic statements?
I read - it might not be true but I read it - in newspapers that claim to be well-informed
that one person in two who went to fight us in the Middle East,
is not investigated on coming back to France.
How is such a thing possible?
How can someone who fought against us...
And I would even include anyone who served in a foreign army,
who therefore took on all the logic and the interests of an army that is not ours.
How come that these people come back without being questioned about what they did and where they were?
How come that it doesn't seem to be a problem that one in two of them is not investigated?
Veterans in general, as experience has shown, develop specific psychological syndromes.
North-Americans know this phenomenon from the veterans of the Vietnam War.
War is a specific organization of crime.
An army prepares itself to kill as many people as possible, who in turn do the same.
This activity cannot be described as facilitating the psychological balance of soldiers,
of soldiers on the front line in particular.
Killing goes against a deep instinct in human beings,
which explains why warfare cannot be organized otherwise than through all sorts of rituals
that are supposed to relieve individuals of the psychological pressure that is exerted on them.
The issue of people who fought against us and come back from a war is therefore to be dealt with very seriously.
It is not a groundless suspicion.
I believe that anyone who served in a foreign army should be questioned on coming back to France,
be it a legal army
or criminal groups, like those who fight flying the banner of ISIS, Al Nusra, or other fanatical organizations.
I think that preventive measures should focus on human aspects, as some of you said earlier.
The ever-growing illusion constituted by the belief in technical measures,
apart from the fact that it is often not long in showing how absurd it is.
We saw it in Viry-Chatillon, where drug dealers savagely attacked a police car
in order to intimidate and frighten them, since they deliberately tried to burn the policemen within the car.
But the most terrifying aspect of this situation is that the policemen were supposed to keep a watch on a CCTV camera.
Either the camera or policemen should keep a watch on drug dealers.
But how could policemen keeping a watch on a camera that keeps a watch on drug dealers
find motivation to such an activity?
And how is such a system efficient?
We quickly understand that this situation is absurd.
Human means always prevail, as was shown in this case, since policemen had to protcet a camera.
This is also true for wiretapping.
Wiretapping everyone, all the time, everywhere, for any reason,
even at the individual level, thanks to these tools that can no longer be opened...
Well this is a myth, for who can process such a quantity of information
collected by machines? Other machines! I know this.
Let me remind you that I was the secretary of the Senate Armed Forces Committee.
I know the drill.
So machines wiretap, and other machines process the wiretapping.
The French ambassador in a country that I won't reveal once told me not to say anything on the phone
- I don't know why he thought we had secrets to share on the phone -
because that would waste the machine's time.
So I learned that what I said was wiretapped, even in this embassy. So I know the drill.
We end up thinking that all this is an illusion, since no one can process so much information.
Well, this is a mistake, you are taking the issue the wrong way,
meaning that if we need to know something about someone for well-founded or unfounded reasons,
it is possible to trace all the information about this person, like his private conversations, in the blink of an eye.
This is the way we should understand the gathering of information.
And now, with the setting up of the giant file that was secretly decided by the government
during the school holidays of November,
we will possess a huge quantity of information, gathered illegitimately, on such and such person.
I will not go further on this issue.
But I need to conclude by saying that if we want to get to the geopolitical root of the problem,
and if we think about the forms of the problem at the individual level in a serious way
- meaning we should avoid to think that reading a book, even more so a religious book, has the effect of
suddenly turning people into terrorists who kill their fellow citizens -
if we understand that a psychological journey leads to the criminal act,
if we want to take preventive measures, if we want to refuse to concede political victories to our opponents,
then we should focus on the following points:
First, the political objective of terrorist attacks is to divide the French people along a religious line.
Our priority is to avoid this division.
Therefore, all those who want to establish a link between a religion and these behaviors, one way or another,
are in collusion with the enemy, because they make their task easier to achieve,
and because they justify the fantasies of those who think the two are connected.
The objective of the political fanatics is to draw a political programme from religion
of which they would become the only representatives.
As we said it earlier, our friends fight against this everywhere.
The majority of the victims of Islamism are in Muslim countries.
In France, the first victims, on a psychological level, are Muslims.
They feel helpless and overwhelmed by a situation of which they are accused of being responsible,
while the most fragile Muslims among youngsters and psychotics and let us say it clearly, lousy individuals,
may feel represented by this form of criminality disguised as ideology.
Secondly, the state must be officially republican.
The Republic is not a neutral regime, it is not a cosumer item.
We cannot channel-hop between the different compartments of the republican state, it's a whole set.
The nation, the state, the Republic and citizenship are one and the same thing
in the French way of conceiving citizenship.
I'm talking about France because it is the country where this idea has been developed the most,
in ways that were not all the time very clever,
and we have not always been the best guardians of this idea
since we sometimes did the opposite of what our motto meant.
Anyway, we should not talk about the republican state only when we are dealing with policing tasks.
The organization we maintain is not an organization in general, but the republican organization, in which freedom prevails.
First, the freedom of conscience, the mother of all other freedoms,
and second, the freedom of citizens.
Therefore, betraying freedom on the pretext better fighting insecurity,
a method that has never been efficient anywhere in the world, is an anti-republican attitude.
We can win this battle without a state of exception.
Besides, the state of emergency is used for any reason in an irresponsible way.
Everyone knows that a state of emergency is useless three days after it was declared.
The state of emergency has only one point, setting the cat among the pigeons, but there has to be pigeons.
And if the state of emergency is permanent, then it's no longer a state of emergency,
because organized crime finds new ways of organizing.
Besides what can you do then, declaring the state of over-emergency? The state of war? The state of exception?
The suspension of individual freedoms provided for in Article 16 of the Constitution?
Do we have to reach this point to understand that all this leads us nowhere?
It only unravels the cohesion and unity of the citizens, and their enthusiasm for defending what they believe in.
This was what I wanted to tell you before the 13th of November,
about it, and about the following events, the events that took place this summer in particular.
I have suffered too much that people think we were the careless ones about these issues.
On the contrary, WE are very serious about them,
because none of the solutions of those who were in office worked, they fail over and over.
The President may have killed four people, but the result here was not that impressive.
I am barely ironic here.
I want our fellow citizens to understand the seriousness of what is done in the name of a fight that is so wrongly led.
One might think that we will win the battle against the fanatics in Syria in the following days.
We hope that the great struggle of the Kurds and their allies will be a victory.
France has no friends in this situation, it only has interests.
and the interest of France is peace, quickly. The quicker the peace, the better we will be.
There has to be peace.
First, we have to eradicate the military presence of our enemies everywhere we can.
And we will make them pay the crimes they committed against us, against unarmed people
who were taken by surprise and who had no belligerent attitude.
I'll repeat what I said once in a TV show, these people are not fighters, they are murderers.
They do not deserve respect, they deserve to be treated for what they are.
We need to show who and what they are: human wrecks.
Their personal behavior and their life are pathetic
They go from an absurd offence to a ridiculous behavior.
Such was the case for most of them, the heinous  assassin of Nice included
who, in addition to his revolver and to his criminal acts, possessed plastic toys.
Well, this must be said.
We hope that a decisive military victory in Syria and Iraq could lead to the holding of a conference
between all the parties involved and those responsible for the war,
those who give orders and those who finance armed groups included.
Only a universal coalition can defeat our enemies.
I bet that if such a coalition becomes a reality, our enemies will be destroyed,
because those who finance them will be part of the coalition, and as a consequence they will stop doing it.
Then we will use the only means that we know of that could get the Syrian and Iraqi states working.
And by states I mean states.
We saw what was the result of a tribal organization of which we are unreasonably responsible
in Lybia and other countries.
The only way that can get these states functioning are elections, imperfect though they might be.
Please don't tell me that we don't know how to organize elections in Syria and Iraq.
It wll take some time of course. We need a year to bring back people and to do the electoral registers again.
The only thing refugees want is to go back home.
I think it is easier to organize elections, and to guarantee their democratic aspect, under the supervision of the UNO
than doing war.
I think it is easier to transport ballot boxes and electoral registers than missiles, bombs and planes,
and all these instruments that are very expensive to maintain.
Someone once laughed at me on this issue.
Does anyone know any other way to organize a state than elections and democratic means?
What kind of benevolent dictatorship would you like to establish?
Have you ever seen armed missionaries that were greated by a population? When? In which historical period?
Have you forgotten the outcome of your wonderful crusade in Iraq?
You know, when the regime of Saddam Hussein was destroyed on the pretext of weapons of mass destruction
because it was undemocratic, while the "saviors" of Iraq were famous for being great democratic forces,
like the Qataris, the Saudis or the Emiratis, who,
thirty years after this war began, just accepted a great democratic breakthrough I must admit,
allowing women to drive, on certain conditions, during certain hours!
Anyway. All this was a comedy that resulted in a disaster, and I pride myself that
I voted against the first Gulf War and those that followed.
All this must stop if we refuse that the world collapse in a global war
that would contaminate one country after the other,
as was almost the case when the Turks irresponsibly shot down a Russian combat aircraft.
At any moment, a provocation somewhere in the world can trigger a war, as history has shown.
The French people must be independent. When France is independent, its voice is heard throughout the world.
The French people must promote peace with all its energy.
Peace is the best way to eradicate terrorism.
This is all for today.
We will see each other again when we will introduce the workgroups in charge of the different reports
on which our policy will be based. Thank you for your attention, sorry for talking so much.